---
publish: true
title: Burns
tags:
  - MS
  - Integumentary
  - NA
description: A burn is an injury to the skin or other organic tissue primarily caused by heat or due to radiation, radioactivity, electricity, friction or contact with chemicals.
---
**References**:
1. Lecturer (Coprade)

___

1. **Thermal Burns**: exposure to high temperatures, the most common form of burning. The most common cause is fire, which requires four elements to appear:
	1. **Heat**: sufficient heat is required for a heat to sustain its chain reaction.
	2. **Oxygen**: oxygen is essential for the chemical reaction of a fire. Oxygen is a flammable gas.
	3. **Fuel**: fuel is continuously consumed in fire
	4. **Chain Reaction**/**Combustion**
2. **Chemical Burns**: exposure to highly acidic or highly alkaline substances.
3. **Electrical Burns**: exposure to electricity, the most lethal form of burning.
4. **Radiation Burns**: exposure to UV or gamma radiation.

Based on the **extent of injury**, burns may be categorized by degree:

| Degree                     | Depth                                 | Manifestations                  | Pain Level         | Wound Healing                 |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------- | ------------------ | ----------------------------- |
| First Degree (Superficial) | **Epidermis**; Surface-level          | Desquamation (unique)           | Mild to moderate   | 5 to 7 days                   |
| Second Degree              | **Dermis**; Partial Thickness         | Blistering and weeping (unique) | Moderate to Severe | 3 to 4 weeks                  |
| Third Degree               | **Beyond the dermis**; Full Thickness | Charring                        | None               | None; permanent disfigurement |

___

# Stages of a Burn Injury
1. **Emergent Stage** (Fluid Accumulation Stage; first 24-48 hours): the shifting of fluid from the intravascular space to the interstitial spaces.
	- This is the cause of **hypovolemia**, tachycardia, and weak pulses.
	- Fluid also includes sodium, which means **hyponatremia** occurs.
	- In cellular injury, the intracellular potassium leaks out, which produces **hyperkalemia**.
2. **Acute Stage** (Fluid Remobilization Stage; **Diuretic Stage**; 3 to 4 days): the shifting of fluid back from the interstitial spaces to the intravascular space.
	- This presents a problem when the shifted fluid has been replaced, and its return will result in **hypervolemia**.
	- **Urine output will increase**, giving this stage its alternate name.
	- Diuresis also involves the excretion of potassium, which **results in hypokalemia**.
	- Sodium levels become **unstable**. Both hyper- and hyponatremia can occur.
3. **Recovery Stage** (5 days+): normalization of the patient's status.

___

# First Aid
1. **Extinguish the fire**, if the patient is still actively on fire. Alternatively, "logrolling" the patient can be used to extinguish the patient.
2. If the patient has been extinguished, **open the airway**.
3. **Cool water may be applied over the burns**, but not ice. No other substances must be used, even burn ointments.
4. **Remove clothing over burns**.
5. **Cover the wound with wet dressing** (wet to avoid adhesion).
6. **Transport** the patient.

___

# In The Hospital
1. **Establish airway**. This is always a priority.
2. **Administer oxygen**.
3. **Start fluid replacement**. The fluid of choice is **Plain Lactate Ringer's Solution**. This is used to stimulate the body with lactic acid in order to stimulate the body to produce bicarbonate for correction of metabolic acidosis.
4. **Antibiotics are given as prophylaxis**. The drug of choice is **Mafenide Acetate** (**Sulfamylon**), a topical antibiotic.
5. **Administer narcotic analgesics for pain**. The drug of choice is **Morphine sulfate**.
6. **Administer tetanus prophylaxis**.
7. **NGT Insertion** may be used to remove gastric acids to avoid the occurrence of **Curling's ulcer**.
8. **Refer the patient for skin grafting**.

___

# Formulas
The Parkland Formula may be used to determine the amount of fluid to be infused into the patient.

$$LR = 4\text{ mL}\times\text{TBSA\%}\times\text{Weight (kg)}$$

The final volume to be given is divided into three segments in the first 24 hours, 8 hours each.
1. First 8 hours: 50% of the total volume to be given.
2. Next 8 hours: 25% of the total volume to be given.
3. Next 8 hours: 25% of the total volume to be given.

**Total Body Surface Area** is calculated with the **Rule of 9s**:

|Part of the Body|Adult|Infant|
|---|---|---|
|Head|9%|18%|
|Anterior Trunk|18%|18%|
|Posterior Trunk|18%|18%|
|Upper Extremities|9% each|9% each|
|Lower Extremities|18% each|14% each|
|Genital|1%|0%|
