**Reference**: PPT (Rotairo)

Any **functional abnormality of the cerebral nervous system**, also called a "brain attack", cerebral infarction, cerebral hemorrhage, ischemic stroke, or simply a **stroke**. This is caused by an interruption of the blood supply to the brain, often from an aneurysm or an obstruction, resulting in damage to the brain tissue.
>[!FAQ] Etiology
>1. **Ischemic Stroke**: 85% of strokes; this is a stroke resulting from obstruction of blood vessels, often due to atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is a deposition of fatty substances, cholesterol, and cellular waste products, calcium, and other substances in the inner lining of an artery. Collectively, this build-up is referred to as "plaque".
>2. **Hemorrhagic Stroke**: 15% of strokes; this is a stroke resulting from bleeding into the surrounding brain tissue (intracerebral, intraventricular, subarachnoid) from a ruptured blood vessel. These are **primarily caused by uncontrolled hypertension**. This may also be caused by an arteriovenous malformation.
>3. **Cerebral Thrombosis**: clotting in an artery that supplies a vital brain center.
>4. **Cerebral Hemorrhage**: an artery bursts as the aneurysm wall bursts potentially from a severe rise in blood pressure, causing hemorrhage and ischemia.
>5. **Cerebral Embolism**: a blood clot travels into the brain's blood vessels, shutting off blood supply.

The risk factors for cerebrovascular accidents vary, but many are related to lifestyle factors. These are divided between modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors:
1. **Non-modifiable**: age, gender, race, heredity
2. **Modifiable**: hypertension, diabetes, transient ischemic attacks (modified with aspirin use), **hyperlipidemia**, **obesity**, heart disease, oral contraceptive use (risk for emboli formation), physical inactivity, stenosis, hypercoagulability, **cigarette smoking**, and **alcohol abuse**.
## Stages of a CVA
1. **Transient Ischemic Attack** (TIA): short-lived obstructions of blood flow. These are "mini strokes" and are a warning sign for a progressive cerebrovascular disease.
	- Temporary loss of neurologic function may occur, but only last less than one day and often less than even fifteen minutes. Most of these resolve within three hours.
2. **Reversible Ischemic Neurologic Deficit** (RIND): these are TIAs that begin to produce symptoms that last up to a week.
3. **Stroke In Evolution** (SIE): gradually worsening symptoms of brain ischemia
4. **Completed Stroke** (CS): the symptoms of the stroke stabilize and rehabilitation can begin.
## Clinical Manifestations - Warning Signs
1. **Sudden weakness**, paralysis, or numbness of the **face, arm, or leg especially on one side of the body**.
2. **Sudden dimness or loss of vision** in one or both eyes, potentially including uncontrollable eye movements or eyelid drooping (ptosis).
3. **Sudden loss of speech/comprehension**, confusion, or difficulty speaking or understanding speech.
4. **Unexplained sudden dizziness**, unsteadiness, loss of balance, or coordination.
5. **Sudden, severe headache**.
6. **Swallowing difficulties or drooling** may also occur.
7. **Loss of memory** during the attack may occur.
8. **Personality changes**, **mood changes**, and changes in the level of consciousness may occur.

>[!EXAMPLE] Left-Sided Cerebrovascular Accident
>1. Right-sided hemiplegia
>2. Impaired speech and language
>3. Slow performance and impaired comprehension
>4. Visual field deficits
>5. Aware of deficits, depression, and anxiety may occur

>[!EXAMPLE] Right-Sided Cerebrovascular Accident
>1. Left-sided hemiplegia
>2. Spacial-perceptual deficits
>3. Short attention span, impaired concept of time
>4. Impaired judgment, impulsive
>5. Unaware of problems; minimizes problems

## Diagnosis
1. An **ultrasound** can show blood flow in the head via **carotid doppler studies**.
2. A **CT Scan** is the primary method of diagnosis, being able to identify the size and location of the CVA, and differentiates between ischemic and hemorrhagic type of strokes. Furthermore, a **CT Angiography** can visualize the vasculature of the brain.
3. An **MRI** is also able to visualize the brain.

>[!TIP] The FAST Method
>In a pre-hospital setting, the F.A.S.T. method may be used:
>1. **Face**: ask the person to smile. Is one side or both sides of the face droopy?
>2. **Arms**: ask the person to raise both arms. Are one of the arms drifting downward or not equal to the other?
>3. **Speech**: ask the person to repeat a simple sentence. Is their speech slurred, strange, or slow?
>4. **Time**: time is highly important in caring for a patient undergoing a stroke. Get help and emergency services as soon as possible once the presence of a stroke is suspected.
## Complications
1. **Re-bleeding**
2. **Cerebral Vasospasm**, which may produce/worsen cerebral ischemia
3. **Acute Hydrocephalus** if the ventricular system of the brain becomes dysfunctional
4. **Seizures**
5. **Motor, sensory, cranial nerve, cognitive, and other functional deficits**
## Management

| Indication                                           | Treatment                                                                                                                                 |
| ---------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Hypoglycemia**                                     | D50 Infusion                                                                                                                              |
| **Hyperglycemia** (>200 mg/dL)                       | Insulin                                                                                                                                   |
| **Hypertension**                                     | Labetalol 10-20 mg IVP repeated q10-20min                                                                                                 |
|                                                      | Nicardipine 5 mg/h, titrate by 2.5 mg/h q5-15min max. 15 mg/h, lower to 3 mg/hr once target BP is reached                                 |
|                                                      | Enalapril 1.25 mg IVP                                                                                                                     |
|                                                      | Sodium nitroprusside (0.5 mcg/kg/min)                                                                                                     |
| **Possible Ischemic Changes or Atrial Fibrillation** | Continuous cardiac monitoring, thrombectomy (removal of thrombus), anticoagulant therapy, and antiepileptic therapy                       |
| **IVF Therapy**                                      | Isotonic sodium chloride (NSS) at 50 mL/hr unless otherwise indicated; avoid D5W and excess administration                                |
| **Aspiration**                                       | NPO status until swallowing is assessed.                                                                                                  |
| **Hypoxia**                                          | Oxygenation therapy if SaO<sub>2</sup> is <94%.                                                                                           |
| **Hyperthermia**                                     | Antipyretics:  rectal or oral acetaminophen and cooling blankets as needed                                                                |
| **Positioning**                                      | Lying flat or head elevated (30 degrees)                                                                                                  |
| **Aneurysm** (hemorrhagic stroke)                    | Surgery is used to secure a blood vessel at the base of the aneurysm.                                                                     |
| **Correct/prevent obstruction**                      | The **gold standard** thrombolytic used is **Alteplase IV r-tPA** via IV. This is used within three to four and a half hours of a stroke. |
## Nursing Management
1. **Assessment**: ABCs, VS, Neurologic Screening, 12-lead ECG, CBG monitoring, admittance to the stroke unit if no surgery will be done.
2. **Management**: oxygen therapy (if hypoxic), blood glucose correction if indicated, and general supportive therapy.

>[!EXAMPLE] Nursing Diagnoses
>- Ineffective tissue perfusion r/t decreased cerebrovascular blood flow
>- Ineffective airway clearance r/t level of consciousness
>- Impaired physical mobility
>- Impaired verbal communication
>- Impaired swallowing r/t loss of reflux
>- Unilateral neglect r/t visual field cut and sensory loss
>- Impaired urinary elimination
>- Situational low self-esteem r/t actual or perceived loss of function

3. **Interventions**:
	1. **Maintain skin integrity**
	2. **Encourage PROM** to affected extremities, **and AROM** to the unaffected extremities every two hours.
	3. **Elevate the affected extremities** to promote venous return and to reduce swelling
	4. Maintain a **safe environment** to reduce risk of injury
	5. Teach the **scanning technique**: turning the head side-to-side when eating and ambulating to compensate for hemanopsia.
	6. Provide care to **prevent deep vein thrombosis**: sequential compression stockings, frequent position changes, mobilization
	7. **Educate** the client on the prevention of a stroke: lifestyle changes (diet, weight control, exercise, avoid alcohol and smoking, and other risk factors), routine health assessment (check cholesterol levels (LDL <70 mg/dL), blood pressure control, blood glucose)